So again, thank you friends, thanks for coming, thanks for joining. It's always a great privilege
to be able to gather together in person and then virtually to reflect on and discuss and
practice the Dharma. So this session is mainly going to be a meditation practice on the Dudjom
Tersar Ngondro, with just right now a short little window of kind of some essential reminders.
And these are very honestly and realistically reminders to myself. I'm just a student and
Venerable Kempo Semandon Nurembiche has asked Lama Lai and myself to just help lead this
session when it's available, and so kind of feel like I'm just doing my best to try to
fulfill that request of Venerable Kempo Rimbiche. So these really very actively are just for
my own mind, reflecting on some of the important points that I've had the great opportunity
to receive of Dharma. And so I think in one way, this is just kind of it's good to be
upfront that we're just repeating these same words that we've heard, many of us have heard
from these great noble living lineage masters, words taught by the Buddha, words preserved
by this chain of lineage masters who took these same words, the same instructions, the
same advice and looked into their mind and checked the truth of these words for themselves.
And they really put the time in to mingle their mind with this inquiry, with this investigation,
which is what the Dharma asks all of us to do, is to really see for ourselves. In Pali
it's E I Pasiko, the Buddha said come see for yourself. This is what the Buddha discovered
to be the truth of things. But we have to actually, in order to get much benefit from
that, we actually have to test those teachings, that advice for ourselves. So there's three
general phases that are often referred to in Buddhism. There's the first phase when
we come across the teachings of just intellectually investigating them. We develop, we kind of
look at and inquire and analyze the teachings. We have the great fortune to receive teachings,
to listen to them, to read them, to connect with these noble living lineage masters. So
this first step is just in getting a basic intellectual understanding of what the teaching
is. And then as we continue, then we actually want to test this teaching to see the validity
in our own experience, with our own mind. Is it helpful? Does it make me happier? Does
it make me kinder? And we test that. So as we test the teaching, we put it into practice
little by little, drop by drop, day by day, and kind of accumulate, kind of refine this
kind of intellectual understanding. And we eventually have some kind of a glimpse of
an experiential insight. We get a little taste. Oh, this is true. So that's this experiential
taste. It's a direct seeing, a direct perception or experience that, oh, for ourselves, this
teaching actually is true. This is helpful. And then as we continue applying those instructions
and those teachings, that what initially is a brief little window of experience becomes
longer and longer. We become more and more familiar with the teaching. We line up how
our habits are more with the actual nature of how things are as well. And that becomes
more of a sustained realization. And so we go initially from just analytic understanding,
and then we apply it into a more of a taste and experiential direct experience of the validity,
the truth of the teaching. And then we actually start to sustain that. We start to mingle
or absorb the teachings into our hearts through practice, through meditation, through this
reflection, contemplation, meditation, until we become the Dharma. And so like the noble,
great kindness master, Buddha Shakyamuni, was completely mingled his entire being, body,
speech, and mind with the Dharma. And so he had sustained realization. And this context
is called enlightenment. So little by little, drop by drop, we have to refine our concepts.
We remove the negative habits that are kind of keep us stumbling, make us feel down, make
us feel fuzzier, lost, more confused, more stuck. We'd remove those, little by little,
and then we increase the good positive qualities we all have, these natural qualities of mind
that we all have, this kindness, patience, ability to forgive, a sense of self worth,
that others are valuable, that the opportunity is precious and fleeting. Kind of these Dharma
insights, these very powerful, profound insights, we start to bring out these good qualities
that are naturally there. So we eliminate what was blocking those good qualities from
being there, and then they just start shining out more and more brightly, these good habits.
And eventually, there's no more covering. There's no more veil. There's no more confusion.
There's no more habit. And we just become natural. And that's, we just kind of sustain
more and more a state of being natural, of being what we really are. And so this is a
Mahayana teaching that this inherent nature of all beings is as empty of being stuck or
fixed in any way. And it's full of all these wonderful, infinite qualities of love, compassion,
sympathetic joy, equanimity, all these goodness qualities. So bodhicitta bursts out and just
becomes our natural, everyday, uninterrupted experience. So that's essentially the path.
We remove the negative habits, perform the positive habits, and then tame our mind, which
in another way can be said to reveal the innate goodness of our mind, our fundamental nature,
which is beyond habits, even good habits. So that's the path. And I think it's good to
remember, because I'm a sentient being, and maybe many people are sentient beings, that
what we do is we wonder. One of the key definitions of the human realm is doubt. In one way that's
interpreted by Ven. Kemper Rinpoche's in their book, Door to Inconceivable Wisdom and Compassion,
is we just doubt the truth of our experience. We get a taste that, oh, virtue leads to virtue.
If I'm kind to someone, kindness comes. If I don't get as angry, I'll feel better. Like
these small little insights that are actually very significant. We doubt them. Oh, that
just happened before. Maybe that's not true. So we basically kind of keep sabotaging our
path towards virtue and our path towards naturalness. We just don't actually get certain about it.
We don't get clear about it, because we keep interrupting it with this doubt, this hesitation.
And so there's different degrees of teaching, and the teachings are vast and profound.
They're so deep. But in the end, we need to gain a certainty wisdom, unfailing doubt in
the teaching, by testing the teachings for ourselves, by putting them into practice,
by really seeing for ourselves, by tasting the teaching again, by seeing the benefit
of removing some bad habits, seeing the benefit of increasing positive habits. We really have
to develop an unwavering conviction that this is true. And so this conviction has nothing
to do with a typical fundamentalism that closes one's eye, where we don't test for ourselves.
We just close our eyes and have blind faith and hold on real hard. And everything has
to fit in our box, or else we push it out. So this is the opposite of that. We're developing
a certainty wisdom that just wants to include, to curiously investigate, to see what else
is happening, to keep looking at the nature, at our experience, at our own mind, to try
to keep looking, keep looking. And until we really see for ourselves again and again and
again and again, this is true. And on the relative level, that just comes down to interdependence.
Everything comes together and eventually comes apart on the relative level. And on the absolute
level of Buddha's two true teachings, there is an unchanging thread of awareness that
can't be grasped. It has no fixed characteristics in any kind of a relative way, because it's
not an object of experience. It doesn't stay put. It's the awareness that's always happening,
that sense of awareness that's unchanging. So these two parts, that everything is impermanent
because everything comes together and is interwoven with cause and effect. And then secondly,
the absolute side of the awareness within which all of this arising and abiding and
dissolving happens within these two parts, the relative and absolute, the changing, uninterrupted,
changing nature of all relative experience. And then the unfabricated, unchanging absolute
nature of awareness. So these are these two components of the path that we have to really
get a firm conviction about, an unwavering conviction. This is the truth. This is how
this is. And just honestly speaking, in my little experience with Dharma, this takes
a lot of time. We have to keep testing, keep looking, keep practicing. And a story, a metaphor
that's really helped me again and again and again, it just keeps popping in my head over
the years is this story is like kind of a, of just a person walking on a beach and all
you see on this beach, there's all these starfish on the shore and they're just all getting
baked in the sun and dying. And so it's like kind of heart wrenching for this person walking
and they keep walking on the beach, all these hundreds of thousands of starfish, they're
all dying and they come upon a person down the beach and this person is going one by
one picking up starfish and throwing it back into the ocean. And then the person walking
on the beach, what are you doing? There's no way you can help all these starfish. They're
going to die. And then the person standing on the beach bends down, picks up a starfish,
throws it into the ocean. I helped that one. That every moment we put into our practice
is a valuable, meaningful, vastly significant moment. But we just doubt it. We don't immediately
see the benefit. We don't, we don't immediately see some big karmic consequence. Maybe we
see a little benefit. Oh, we're a little more relaxed, a little more caring, a little more
kind to ourselves, a little more kind to others. Then we keep trying to sustain this moment
by moment, just these short little windows of practice. Doesn't have to be some big thing,
but just short little interruptions of how we think everything is just so stuck this
way. I am this way. Life is this way. These little interruptions of like, Oh, maybe it's
not all this way. Maybe there's a little window of kind of some humor in the situation, a
little fresh air, a little kind of sense of what if, Oh, maybe, maybe I don't know. Maybe
something different could happen. A little curiosity and just moment by moment, these
little windows. And that's the whole point of kind of engaging the teachings, whether
we're reading the scriptures, memorizing the scriptures, transcribing the scriptures, or
sitting down, doing formal meditation, a silent sitting meditation or a chanting meditation.
Then we're just constantly interrupting this tendency to doubt. We're like, we pull ourselves
out of the situation and we look at ourselves experiencing and say, Oh, we keep bursting
our own bubble. Instead of just letting ourselves be with the practice, be with the teaching,
we keep stepping outside and watching it. Oh, it's not really good enough. I'm not good
enough. This isn't strong enough. I should do some other thing. Maybe there's another
better practice. We kind of keep interrupting the moment. We keep popping ourselves outside
of the moment. Let's say it's like taking two sticks to rub together to make a fire.
If we keep stopping the motion, then we'll never get enough friction to cause heat and
never have a fire. Like it really does have to be an ongoing effort of moments and these
moments build up and then we really do see this change for ourselves and our own experience.
Little by little and on a very, very practical way, this really comes down to just common
sense. Like we've gone over some basic view and last time of the impact that our motivation
has on our practice and the common sense teaching, the most outer everyday practical teaching
the Buddha taught us is his four thoughts that turned the mind to the Dharma. We are
essentially worthwhile, valuable, this precious human embodiment, each of us. It's unquestionable.
If we look at it closely, we'll come to see that is true. The second, impermanence. Everything
is impermanent. The third, cause and effect. Good leads to good, bad leads to bad. It's
cause and effect. It doesn't really need a big explanation. There's so many teachings
but cause and effect. And then samsara. When we grab onto part of a moving system and we
hold onto it wishing it stays in place, it starts to drag us around and it's suffering.
We feel the burn of getting pulled around by our own grasping. The samsara is dissatisfying.
It's uncertain. We want to hold it and make it certain so there's not that sense of dis-ease
or insecurity. So we try to lock it in place and it refuses to lock in place because it's
impermanent and then we get pulled by it, by experience, by our emotions, by our thoughts,
by what's happening outside. These four thoughts are the most practical level, common sense.
They don't require really much logical investigation. It's just their basic default views of almost
every being, like every human being. We just keep not trusting them. So that's why the
Buddha really strongly encouraged us to test for ourselves. Look at the preciousness of
our situation. And remember that. Have that be a lived experience every moment or impermanence.
This is impermanent. As it happens, it's going. So we shouldn't waste our time on things that
really aren't so meaningful. Cause and effect. If we do these good things, if we have a more
relaxed state of mind, that habit becomes stronger if we keep doing it over time. Similarly,
if we're avoiding a bad habit, we stop ourselves from doing something that's not as destructive.
It doesn't help us. It doesn't make us happy. It doesn't make others feel good and relaxed
around us. We stop doing that and gradually that habit weakens until we're just not interested
in it so much anymore. This cause and effect. And then samsara is suffering. It's unfixable.
We should do whatever we can to make other beings happy, to like care for them, to care
for ourselves. We should do anything and everything we can that's within our power, our means,
our understanding with what's available with others, their readiness. But we'll never fix
it. Samsara will always be suffering. Grasping mind will always be tinged by suffering, the
truth of pervasive suffering. It's just how grasping mind works. And so we do whatever
we can to ease our own minds and to ease the minds of others. We put so much energy into
that as bodh, like taking a bodhisattva bow, that becomes our path. All we're trying to
do is relieve others, help a little bit, little bit and bit by bit starfish by starfish, drop
by drop. These moments build up and they become more prolonged experiences. And then it becomes
more of a stable way that we're constantly engaging our life over time. I find just for
myself again and again, it's really important to recognize two sides of this. One, every
moment counts. Every little bit makes a big difference because it's karma, cause and effect.
Every moment has impact because it's infinitely intermingled with all the other things happening,
all the other moments of mind, all the other moments of physical interaction. It's all
interrelated. So everything counts. And at the same time, to really see a significant
impact in changing our habits over time, we really have to keep putting the moments in.
We really do. That's just, it's just a very practical thing. Otherwise it's like Lama
Chi Mei, Rinpoche's father. He said, he joked, "Oh, if we just have a rainbow mouth, not
rainbow heart, we just talk nice. We can say, oh, everything's impermanent and it's all
of divine mandala and everything's free and easy and it's all already fine." It's so easy
to say those things. It's so easy to say those things. But to actually have that really absorb
in our hearts and mingle that with our minds all the time, it really takes sustained effort
over time. And everything we put into it will actually bring about that result because cause
and effect. That cause will never be lost. But to really have our mind be tamed to change,
to have those habits be smoothened out so that then there's a little window of opening where
we don't doubt our nature anymore. We just let ourselves be natural. And then our Buddha
nature just shines. Because the negative habits are so strong, it really takes time to smooth
out, to have the positive habits come fresh, and then just to finally relax and just let
our minds and our bodies and our speech just naturally do what they do. Their enlightened
nature just shines out. So that's just a brief thing I thought to mention. I didn't really
have any time to prepare this today. So that's my kind of random rambling. But the basic
point is really every moment does count. And the moments build up to really big effects.
And so if we want to see a big result in our practice, we have to be very practical. Put
the moments in. Short little moments. And then we change our mind. We just pause and
refresh. Pause, refresh. Open, grounded, sensitive to others, caring, kind. These great noble
beings like you can see that as these great masters get older, so many of them just become
so sweet and kind. You can, I've seen this a little bit in my experience. Maybe when
they're a little younger, a little more vigorous, they're a little more sharp cutting. Depends
on the master. Clear this away. Eliminate this obstacle. Eliminate this. Just get everything
lined up. And then these masters become so sweet. Oh, you do. Do one Moni, one Moni,
just one. They don't say a million. Because every little thing counts, every little bit.
And so we have to play both sides. One, every Moni mantra really counts. The provisional
teachings say that really can give such vast benefit. One moment of reflecting on the permanence
has such an almost nearly infinite positive impact. But at the same time, we need to keep
putting, having those moments happen. We need to keep reflecting on impermanence, on preciousness,
on cause and effect, on samsara. And with this ground, then we'll stay on the path, the path
of not doubting our own goodness. The goodness of others will actually eliminate that unhealthy
doubt which closes us down and leads us away from the nature. And instead, we'll really
brightly, clearly shine this certainty wisdom that's free of doubt. The nature is what it
is. You and me are fundamentally good. And there's a path in actually having this goodness
come out more and more reliably all the time that enlightenment is possible and beings
have done it. And now is my opportunity to walk this same path and see for myself the
benefits that come from that. And offer that kindness and generosity to others. Make their
lives just a little better. Give them a little more support so they can relax into their own
goodness too. So drop by drop, we do that together. And these are kind of the point
of these practice sessions, just to kind of reconnect, have a little window where we're
kind of supporting each other. And doing that kind of based on our own limitations, but
putting in the time little by little and the result will be, according to all the sutras
and tantras, just amazingly powerful, impactful, and wonderful. We'll see that at some point
along the path. We'll have the clarity of mind, the certainty wisdom will be strong
enough where we'll see the karmic result in our own experience and look back on these
times now and so genuinely rejoice that we took these moments to do this dharma activity.
We'll be just overwhelmingly happy that we put this time and now for ourselves and for
others. So thank you all so much. We'll do a short silent meditation. And then we'll
continue here with the dudram terra sartanandra sadhana practice. This again the session will
go till 5.15. And then so in about a little hour, hour and 10 minutes. So we'll begin
at the beginning. And this dudram terra sartanandra begins on page 12 with the seven line prayer.
And then due to time constraint, let's see. Yeah. We'll go through everything. Great. Thank
you.